---
layout: post
title: "Dynamics"
date: 2018-03-18
mathjax: true
---
_(Originally published on [Tumblr](https://infinitejoke.tumblr.com/post/171993483186/notes-on-dynamics))_

Moving on from [kinematics]({% post_url 2018-03-17-kinematics %}) to dynamics now.

## Newton's First Law of Motion

The law of inertia states that [an object at rest stays at rest and an object in motion stays in motion
with the same speed and in the same direction unless acted upon by an unbalanced force](http://www.physicsclassroom.com/class/newtlaws/Lesson-1/Newton-s-First-Law).

In other words, with the lack of opposing forces -- such as friction and air resistance --
an object in motion would travel forever at constant speed. No force is needed to keep something in motion.

## Newton's Second Law of Motion

[The net force applied on an object causes an acceleration inversely proportional to the mass of the object.
Simply put, larger mass makes objects more difficult to turn or change speed.](https://scripts.mit.edu/~srayyan/PERwiki/index.php?title=Module_2_--_Newton%27s_Second_Law)

$$\vec{F}_{net} = m\vec{a}$$

While $m\vec{a}$ is equivalent to the net force acting on the object, it *is not* a force itself.
It is a product of two quantities, mass and acceleration.

Let's explore a different definition of the law based on **linear momentum**,
the product of an object’s mass multiplied by its velocity:

$$\vec{p} = m\vec{v}$$

Here, _the rate of change of momentum_ of an object becomes directly proportional to the force applied,
and this change in momentum takes place in the direction of the applied force.

$$\vec{F}_{net} = \frac{d\vec{p}}{dt} = m\frac{d\vec{v}}{dt} = m\vec{a}$$

## Newton's Third Law

[If an object A exerts a force on object B, then object B must exert a force of equal magnitude
and opposite direction back on object A.](https://www.khanacademy.org/science/physics/forces-newtons-laws/newtons-laws-of-motion/a/what-is-newtons-third-law)

$$\vec{F}\_{12} = -\vec{F}_{21}$$

## Conservation of Momentum

[The total momentum of a closed system is constant, and when objects interact,
their total momentum before the interaction is the same as after the interaction.](https://physics.info/momentum-conservation/summary.shtml)

$$\sum p_{before} = \sum p_{after}$$

### Collision

When two objects separate after collision:

$$p_1 + p_2 = p_1' + p_2'$$

$$m_1v_1 + m_2v_2 = m_1v_1' + m_2v_2'$$

When two objects stick together after collision:

$$p_1 + p_2 = p_{1 + 2}'$$

$$m_1v_1 + m_2v_2 = (m_1 + m_2)v'$$

## Energy

Gravitational **potential energy** is the energy possessed by the object due to
the gravitational attraction of the Earth for the object.
It depends on the object's vertical position (height) and its mass:

$$E_p = mgh$$

Translational **kinetic energy** is the energy possessed by the object due to its motion.

$$E_k = \frac{p^2}{2m} = \frac{1}{2}mv^2$$

The standard unit of measurement for energy is the `joule`, equivalent to $kg*(m/s)^2$.

## Rotational motion

In rotational motion, inertial mass $m$ becomes the **moment of inertia** $I$.
For objects rotating about the center, it is defined as:

* $I = mr^2$ for a point mass $m$ at a distance $r$ from the axis of rotation
* $I = \frac{1}{12}ml^2$ for a rod of length $l$ and mass $m$
* $I = \frac{1}{2}mr^2$ for a solid cylinder of radius $r$ and mass $m$
* $I = mr^2$ for a cylindrical shell with open ends of radius $r$ and mass $m$
* $I = \frac{2}{5}mr^2$ for a solid sphere of radius $r$ and mass $m$

In translational motion, force $F$ causes an object to accelerate.
In rotational motion, an object acquires angular acceleration due to **torque** $\tau$,
defined for the length of the moment arm $r$ as: 

$$\tau = Fr$$

A direct equivalent of the Second Law for rotational motion is expressed in terms of torque and moment of inertia:

$$\tau = I\varepsilon$$

**Angular momentum** $L$ is defined as the product of the moment of inertia $I$ and the angular velocity $\omega$.

$$L = I\omega$$

Analogously to linear momentum $p = mv$, it is subject to the conservation of angular momentum principle if there is no external torque on the object.

Rotational **kinetic energy** thus becomes:

$$E_k = \frac{L^2}{2I} = \frac{1}{2}I\omega^2$$
